<sect1 id="using-movieformats"> <title>Supported Movie Formats</title>

    <sect2>
        <title>Introduction</title>

        <para>
            Many digital cameras support taking of short movie clips. 
            These clips are usually stored in AVI or MP4 format. 
            &digikam; understands metadata from these formats and will generate 
            thumbnails for the movie files.
        </para>

        <para>
            However, &digikam; is not a movie editing application and it does not have any 
            built-in movie viewing or editing capabilities. 
            If you double click on a movie file &digikam; you can preview video 
            or choose a viewing application through your desktop settings.
        </para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2>
        <title>Video Formats</title>

        <para>
            &digikam; relies on <ulink url="http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/multimediaoverview.html">Qt5 Multimedia framework</ulink> to handle video files. 
            You must take a care to have installed all parts of this frameworks on your computer, and especially the multimedia plugins interface.
            This framework will able to play video files depending on the availability of video codecs 
            installed on your system. &digikam; do not include extra video codec. These codecs are loaded on demand at running time.
        </para>

        <para>
            On &Linux; desktop, this framework will use GStreamer backends. You need to install GStreamer plugins named "Good", "Bad" and "Ugly",
            to be sure that all video formats will be handled by Qt5 Multimedia interface.
        </para>

        <para>
            On other desktop operating system, you will need to install extra video codecs, as KLite Codec Pack for <ulink url="http://www.codecguide.com/download_kl.htm">Microsoft Windows</ulink> or for <ulink url="http://www.techisky.com/tips/k-lite-codec-pack-for-mac.html">Apple MacOS</ulink>.
        </para>

    </sect2>

</sect1>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
