<sect2>
    <title>Reporting Bugs</title>

    <para>
        &digikam; is an Open Source project. This means that it relies on its users to play their part by, at least, reporting problems and suggesting possible improvements.
    </para>

    <para>
        &digikam; makes it as easy as possible for you to report bugs or suggest improvements. Wherever you are in the application the Help menu will include a Report Bugs option. This will display a message box with a highlighted link. Click on the link and your web browser will open the page for the reporting system. All the information required will already be filled in, just follow the instructions for completing your report.
    </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title>Support</title>

    <para>
        &digikam; is a community supported project, which means that users and developers support one another. If you become a regular user of &digikam; you are encouraged to join the &digikam; Users Mailing List. You can start off by asking questions to other &digikam; users and hopefully soon you will be answering the support questions of others.
    </para>

    <para>
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-users">&digikam; Users Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

    <para>
        You can also visit the <ulink url="http://www.digikam.org">&digikam; Home Page.</ulink> for news of new releases and other &digikam; related information.
    </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title>Getting Involved</title>

    <para>
        There are many ways that you can get involved with the continued development of &digikam;. You do not need to be a software developer. You can help with documentation, translation and user interface design or just contribute really good ideas to the wish-list. You can also get involved by testing early development code as it is being developed and providing feedback to the developers. Of course, if you are a software developer then you can help to make &digikam; the best digital photograph application there is.
    </para>

    <para>
        The best way to start getting involved with &digikam; is to join the Developers Mailing List.
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-devel">&digikam; Developer Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

</sect2>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
