<chapter id="tool-maintenance">
<chapterinfo>

    <abstract>
        <para>
            Maintenance is a tool running processes in the background to maintain image collections and database contents.
        </para>
    </abstract>

    <keywordset>
        <keyword>Maintenance</keyword>
        </keywordset>
    </chapterinfo>

    <title>Maintenance Tool</title>

    <sect1 id="tool-maintenance-intro">
        <title>Introduction</title>

        <para>
            Depending on your workflow, your &digikam; settings and whether you work on your images collection also with other programs it might be necessary to run maintenance operations from time to time to update the &digikam; databases and also your images regarding duplicates, face tags, quality labels etc. The maintenance tool can do that for you, even more than one operation in one go depending on your requirements.
        </para>

    </sect1>

    <sect1 id="tool-maintenance-features">
        <title>The Maintenance Features</title>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-common">
            <title>The Common Options</title>

            <para>
                In the Common Options section you can restrict the scope of the maintenance process(es) to certain albums or tags. You got to un-check <guilabel>Whole albums collection</guilabel> or <guilabel>Whole tags collection</guilabel> to get access to the drop down fields where you can select albums or tags. Note that in this drop down field you have a context menu to select or deselect children and/or parents and also to invert the selection. If you switch from <guilabel>Albums</guilabel> to <guilabel>Tags</guilabel> or vice versa your selection in the now grayed out item will remain untouched which might be useful if you need a certain selection more often.
            </para>
            
            <para>
                Since many of the processes the maintenance tool can perform are time consuming (depending also on the scope, of course) you have the choice to check <guilabel>Work on all processor cores</guilabel> if your machine has more than one and they are not occupied otherwise.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-scan">
            <title>The Scan for New Items Tool</title>

            <para>
                This process will scan the collections you defined in 
                <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guisubmenu>Configure &digikam;</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Collections</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice> 
                for new items, &ie; image files you added to your collections while &digikam; was not running. You can run this process also automatically on &digikam; startup by checking <guilabel>Scan for new items at startup</guilabel> in 
                <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guisubmenu>Configure &digikam;</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Miscellaneous</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice>.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-thumbs">
            <title>The Rebuild Thumbnails Tool</title>

            <para>
                Rebuilding the thumbnails might be necessary if you worked on your images with other applications or if you changed the thumbnail size in 
                <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guisubmenu>Configure &digikam;</guisubmenu><guisubmenu>Views</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Tree-Views</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice>. 
                The <quote> Scan for changed or non-cataloged items</quote> option can speed up the process in the first case or if you just added pictures to your collection.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-fingerprints">
            <title>The Rebuild Fingerprints Tool</title>

            <para>
                Fingerprints are necessary for finding duplicates and similar items and for finding images by scetches. For detailed description see 
                <link linkend="using-mainwindow-fuzzysearches">Fuzzy View</link>.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-duplicates">
            <title>The Find Duplicates Tool</title>

            <para>
                The Find Duplicates Tool is doing the same as the <guilabel>Find duplicates</guilabel> button in the Fuzzy View, but here you can combine it with other maintenance operations and you have the chance to check <quote>Work on all processor cores</quote> under Common Options (see above) to speed up the process.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-faces">
            <title>The Face Management Tool</title>
            <subtitle>Detect and Recognize Faces</subtitle>

            <para>
                This is the same process you can access in the People View with the <guilabel>Scan collection for faces</guilabel> button. Here you just cannot set the Fast - Accurate parameter and the option <quote>Clear and rebuild all training data</quote>. For more information about the Faces Data Management options see 
                <link linkend="using-mainwindow-peopleview">People View</link>.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-quality">
            <title>The Image Quality Sorter Tool</title>

            <para>
                The Image Quality Sorter assigns quality labels to images according to the settings in 
                <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guisubmenu>Configure &digikam;...</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Image Quality Sorter</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice>.
                There you also have to enable this tool if you want to use it. Since it is a time consuming process it's a good idea to check <guilabel>Work on all processor cores</guilabel> and restrict the job to certain albums or tags. The tool will set the red flag for <quote>rejected</quote>, the yellow one for <quote>pending</quote> and the green one for <quote>accepted</quote>.
            </para>

        </sect2>

        <sect2 id="tool-maintenance-features-sync">
            <title>The Metadata Synchronizer Tool</title>

            <para>
                TODO
            </para>

        </sect2>

    </sect1>

</chapter>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
