<sect2 id="using-setup-misc">
    <title>Miscellaneous Settings</title>

    <sect3 id="using-setup-misc-General">
        <title>General Settings</title>

        <para>
            With the <guilabel>Confirm when moving items to trash</guilabel> setting you can set the verbosity of &digikam; when you delete a photograph or an Album. See <link linkend="using-deleteimage">Deleting a Photograph</link> and <link linkend="using-deletealbum">Deleting an Album</link> sections for more details.
        </para>

        <para>
            The editorial changes done through the right sidebar can be quietly applied by &digikam; when setting the <guilabel>Apply changes in the right sidebar without confirmation</guilabel> option. Otherwise the changes must be applied by pressing the <guilabel>Apply changes</guilabel> button.
        </para>

        <para>
            You can also switch off the display of the splash screen when &digikam; loads. This may speed up the start time of &digikam; slightly.
        </para>

        <anchor id="rescan-items" />

        <para>
            <guilabel>Scan for new items at startup</guilabel> option will force &digikam; to scan the album library tree for new items added or removed between &digikam; sessions. This may slow down the start time of &digikam;. If any items have been removed from album library, &digikam; will ask you confirmation before to remove definitely item references in database.
        </para>

    </sect3>

    &doc-using-setup-misc-behavior;

</sect2>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
