<sect1 id="using-bqm"> <title>The &digikam; Batch Queue Manager</title>
<anchor id="bqm.anchor"/>

    <sect2 id="bqm-mainwindow"> <title>The Batch Queue Manager Window</title>

        <para>
            TODO
        </para>

    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="bqm-rawworkflow"> <title>Batch RAW Workflow</title>

        <sect3><title>Introduction to Raw Converter</title>

            <para>
            With the Batch Queue Manager, you can import/convert your images stored in
            <emphasis>RAW format</emphasis> to a target formats as (<guilabel>JPEG</guilabel>,
            <guilabel>TIFF</guilabel>, or <guilabel>PNG</guilabel>).
            </para>

            <para>There are ome considerations before your convert, and even before you shoot
            in raw format. RAW image file formats keep the original information of the exposure
            supposedly without loss (when compressed, they use reversible, lossless compressions
            algorithms). Many photographers prefer to take their picture in RAW mode because
            the camera's built-in conversion program is often of lesser quality than what
            you can achieve with digital image processing. The whitebalance of the digital
            camera is registered but not applied to the image. Some CMOS CCD's create four
            types of color filter data: RGBG, Red, Green, Blue and another Green mask for
            contrast enhancement. This tool can take this into account.
            </para>

            <para>
            The conversion is actually based on <command>libraw</command>. Don't expect to produce the same images
            as software provided by the camera vendor but sometimes libraw gives better results.
            </para>

        </sect3>

        <sect3 id="using-rawconverter"> <title>Using Raw Converter</title>

            <para>
            Select the RAW files to convert and load them to a dedicate batch queue.
            </para>

            <para>
            In Batch Queue Manager settings view, you can adjust the available check and value boxes
            to optimize the RAW conversion process. The first checkbox indicates to use the camera 
            settings for white balance.
            The essential parameters like brightness, and red/blue amplifier may be adjusted.
            If the result is not quite optimal, don't worry, it is always possible to fine-tune
            the image later on.
            </para>

            <para>
            A <guilabel>Four color RGBG</guilabel> conversion can be selected to use contrast
            information. (If your camera works in RGB mode, the RGBG setting has no effect).
            </para>

            <para>You must choose one output formats to save the conversion result by placing the
            target file format conversion tool. The file name will stay the same by default, only the extension changes.
            <guilabel>JPEG</guilabel> uses the lossy algorithm and produces the smallest output
            file size. In opposite the tagged image format (<guilabel>TIFF</guilabel>) preserves all information of
            your image while using lossless LZW compression.
            </para>

            <tip><para>
            If you intend to work a lot on your images or if it is likely that you have to
            reuse it later on, then don't use <guilabel>JPEG</guilabel> format because it
            allows a limited number of operations before it deterioates visibly.
            <guilabel>TIFF</guilabel> and <guilabel>PNG</guilabel> are better suited to keep
            the original data.
            </para></tip>

            <note><para>
            If you choose <guilabel>JPEG</guilabel>, or <guilabel>TIFF</guilabel>, or <guilabel>PNG</guilabel> as the <guilabel>Save Format</guilabel> then the metadata included in RAW file will be included in the target
            files as Exif information.
            </para></note>

            <para>
            When you have finished to setup the queue, click the <guibutton>Process</guibutton> button to start the
            conversion. If you want abort image conversion, press the <guibutton>Abort</guibutton>
            button.
            </para>

            <!-- TODO : add a screenshot of BQM RAW conversion in action -->

        </sect3>

    </sect2>
    
</sect1>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
