<sect2>
    <title
>Bugs (programmafouten) melden</title>

    <para
>&digikam; een opensource-project. Dit betekent dat het afhankelijk is van de gebruikers voor het waarborgen van de kwaliteit van de software. Wij stellen het zeer op prijs dat de gebruiker eventuele problemen met het programma meldt, en eventuele suggesties voor verbeteringen aan ons doorgeeft. </para>

    <para
>&digikam; levert een eenvoudige manier om uw foutmeldingen en suggesties naar ons te sturen. Overal in het programma vindt u een help-menu, met daarin de mogelijkheid om een bugrapport te verzenden. De dialoog die geopend wordt bevat een webkoppeling die een browservenster opent met het URL-adres van KDE's bugrapporteersysteem. Volg de instructies om uw rapport in te dienen. </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title
>Support</title>

    <para>
        &digikam; is a community supported project, which means that users and developers support one another. If you become a regular user of &digikam; you are encouraged to join the &digikam; Users Mailing List. You can start off by asking questions to other &digikam; users and hopefully soon you will be answering the support questions of others.
    </para>

    <para>
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-users"
>&digikam; Users Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

    <para>
        You can also visit the <ulink url="http://www.digikam.org"
>&digikam; Home Page.</ulink
> for news of new releases and other &digikam; related information.
    </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title
>Getting Involved</title>

    <para>
        There are many ways that you can get involved with the continued development of &digikam;. You do not need to be a software developer. You can help with documentation, translation and user interface design or just contribute really good ideas to the wish-list. You can also get involved by testing early development code as it is being developed and providing feedback to the developers. Of course, if you are a software developer then you can help to make &digikam; the best digital photograph application there is.
    </para>

    <para>
        The best way to start getting involved with &digikam; is to join the Developers Mailing List.
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-devel"
>&digikam; Developer Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

</sect2>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
