<sect2>
    <title
>Rapportera fel</title>

    <para
>&digikam; är ett projekt med öppen källkod. Det betyder att projektet litar på att användarna gör en insats genom att åtminstone rapportera problem och föreslå möjliga förbättringar. </para>

    <para
>&digikam; gör det så enkelt som möjligt att rapportera fel eller föreslå förbättringar. Var du än befinner dig i programmet innehåller hjälpmenyn alltid alternativet Rapportera fel. Det visar en meddelanderuta med en markerad länk. Klicka på länken så visas sidan för felrapportering i din webbläsare. All information som krävs har redan fyllts i, följ bara instruktionerna för att färdigställa rapporten. </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title
>Support</title>

    <para>
        &digikam; is a community supported project, which means that users and developers support one another. If you become a regular user of &digikam; you are encouraged to join the &digikam; Users Mailing List. You can start off by asking questions to other &digikam; users and hopefully soon you will be answering the support questions of others.
    </para>

    <para>
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-users"
>&digikam; Users Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

    <para>
        You can also visit the <ulink url="http://www.digikam.org"
>&digikam; Home Page.</ulink
> for news of new releases and other &digikam; related information.
    </para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
    <title
>Getting Involved</title>

    <para>
        There are many ways that you can get involved with the continued development of &digikam;. You do not need to be a software developer. You can help with documentation, translation and user interface design or just contribute really good ideas to the wish-list. You can also get involved by testing early development code as it is being developed and providing feedback to the developers. Of course, if you are a software developer then you can help to make &digikam; the best digital photograph application there is.
    </para>

    <para>
        The best way to start getting involved with &digikam; is to join the Developers Mailing List.
        <ulink url="https://mail.kde.org/mailman/listinfo/digikam-devel"
>&digikam; Developer Mailing
        List joining instructions.</ulink>
    </para>

</sect2>

<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
End:
-->
